Added Val -> Project Conversion guide (#271)
val-town/val-town-docs: src/content/docs/projects/val-to-project.mdx

---
title: Convert a Val to a Project
description: Convert a long Val into a Val Town Project

> sidebar:

Reviewer: This guide feels a little out of place in the Projects sidebar. These pages tend to be more reference-y, but this is definitely a step by step guide. My instinct would be to put this in the Guides section but then find a good place to link to it in Projects > Overview, with a big link card.

  order: 4
---
[Val Town Projects](https://blog.val.town/blog/projects/) help you organize code and collaborate more effectively. This guide walks you through migrating single-file vals into a Project.

Projects offer key advantages over single-file vals:
- **Better Organization**: Group related vals together with relative imports
- **Collaboration**: Branches, forks, pull requests and version control

> - **Serve static files**: Serve HTML, CSS, Markdown, JSON and more.

Reviewer: This selling content feels a little out of place to me

:::note
Looking to **start** a new project? Remix one of our [**Templates**](https://www.val.town/explore/use-cases#:~:text=Hacker%20News%20mentions-,Project%20Starters,-Projects%20are%20groups) instead.
:::

There are many ways to structure a Project. Here's one example, which this guide follows:
```
my-project/
├── frontend/
│   ├── index.html
│   └── styles.css
│   └── index.tsx
├── backend/
│   └── index.ts
│   └── database/

> ```

Reviewer: I'd put this in section (7) where you address it

## 1. Create a New Project
Go to the [Val Town Dashboard](https://www.val.town/dashboard) and create a **New Project**.

## 2. Copy Vals to Project

> Copy and paste each val you want to migrate into the Project, with the correct val type.

Reviewer: I think steps 3 - 5 kinda belong under step 2. Those steps explain how to copy over a val. It's not just a straightforward copy and paste

> ## 3. Redirect Original Vals

Reviewer: I think this step should be moved down. It's not the priority

Author: Moved this down by 1 but still kept it in, mostly because I think it's important for platform cleanliness. (It would suck for old vals to be lingering around and getting used, if there's a newer version of it living it in a Project elsewhere)

After migrating, update the old vals to redirect users.

- **Option 1: Add a note in `README.md`** 

    `This val has moved to https://www.val.town/x/username/project-name`

- **Option 2: Redirect the val**

```js
export default async function(req: Request): Promise<Response> {
    return Response.redirect("https://www.val.town/x/username/project-name", 302);

> }

Reviewer: I typically redirected the val to the http endpoint of the project, not the project itself

```

## 4. Rename Vals
1. Remove prefixes that match your project name

>     - Example: `myblog_homepage` → `homepage`  

Reviewer: This step isn't necessary but it is a good idea. We should explain why

> 2. Rename the main HTTP endpoint to `index` (this becomes the entry point)

Reviewer: Again, not necessary but a good convention

## 5. Update Imports

> Replace absolute imports with relative imports:

Reviewer: Probably a good idea to explain why this is necessary: so it works across branches and remixes

**Before:**
```js
// Absolute imports
import { myVal } from "https://esm.town/v/username/myVal"
```

**After:**
```js
// Relative imports
import { myVal } from "./myVal.ts"
```

> ## 6. Move Static Content to Files

Reviewer: This step is very optional. We should make that clear

### **HTML Example**

Replace inline HTML strings with a `index.html` file:

**Before:**
```js
  return new Response(`
    <html>
      <head>
        <title>Hello, world!</title>
        <style>${css}</style>
      </head>
    </html>,
  `),
```

**After:**
```js
// 1. Create a file at `/frontend/index.html`
// 2. Serve your files with:

> import { parseProject, serveFile } from "https://esm.town/v/std/utils/index.ts";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { serveFile } from "https://esm.town/v/std/utils/index.ts";
```

// Example using Hono  
app.get("/", async c => {
  return serveFile("/frontend/index.html", import.meta.url);
});

```
[**Example usage**](https://www.val.town/x/std/reactHonoStarter/code/backend/index.ts)

### **CSS Example**

Replace CSS-in-JS with a `styles.css` file:

**Before:**
```js
const css = `
    body {
    color: red;
    }
`;
```

**After:**
```js
// 1. Create a file at `/frontend/styles.css`
// 2. Reference in your HTML with <link> tag
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/public/style.css">
```
[**Example usage**](https://www.val.town/x/stevekrouse/reactHonoExample/code/frontend/index.html)

## 7. Separate Frontend and Backend

- Store `/frontend` and `/backend` logic in separate directories.
- You can use a `/public` directory for serving static assets ([Example](https://www.val.town/x/stevekrouse/reactHonoExample/code/backend/index.ts)) - though this is mostly just a [convention](https://www.val.town/x/stevekrouse/reactHonoExample/code/frontend/README.md).
- By separating the frontend and backend, we largely eliminate the need for conditional or async import patterns common in single-file vals.

> [**Example usage**](https://www.val.town/x/stevekrouse/reactHonoExample)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an example project set up with the frontend and backend in separate folders:  [reactHonoExample](https://www.val.town/x/stevekrouse/reactHonoExample).
```

## 8. Handle Binary Assets
**For images and other binary files:**
- Upload them via the [Blob Admin Tool](https://www.val.town/x/stevekrouse/blob_admin/code/README.md) 

> - Use the returned URL in your code

Reviewer: Also confusing, probably requires explaining the blob admin public folder

> [**Example usage**](https://www.val.town/x/stevekrouse/stevekrouse_dot_com/code/posts/proposal.tsx)

Reviewer: You probably need to link to specific lines in this file or tell folks to cmd+f for "blob_admin"
